Add Trino 423 release notes (#18496)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/release/release-423.md

# Release 423 (3 Aug 2023)

## General

* Add support for renaming fields with a `RENAME COLUMN` statement. ({issue}`16757`)

> * Add support for setting a field type with a `SET DATA TYPE` statement. ({issue}`16959`)

Reviewer: @ebyhr I reworded your suggestion to this

# Release 423 (9 Aug 2023)

## General

> * Add support for renaming nested fields in a column with a `RENAME COLUMN`

Reviewer 2: > Add support for renaming nested fields in a column via `RENAME COLUMN`

Reviewer: Done

  statement. ({issue}`16757`)

>   * Add support for setting the type of a nested field in a column with a `SET

Reviewer 2: Extra space before `*`

Reviewer 2: > Add support for setting the type of a nested field in a column via `SET DATA TYPE`.

Reviewer: Done

  DATA TYPE` statement. ({issue}`16959`)

> * Add support for column comments on materialized views. ({issue}`18016`)

Reviewer 2: > Add support for comments on materialized view columns.

Reviewer: Done

* Improve performance of `INSERT` and `CREATE TABLE AS ... SELECT` queries. ({issue}`18212`)
* Improve performance when planning queries involving multiple window functions. ({issue}`18491`)

> * Improve optimizer estimates for queries with a `BETWEEN` clause. ({issue}`18501`)

Reviewer 2: What's the user-visible effect? Maybe rephrase to:

> Improve performance of queries involving `BETWEEN` clauses.

Reviewer: yeah .. that sounds good. Done.

* Improve performance of queries containing redundant `ORDER BY` clauses in
  views or `WITH` clauses. This may affect the semantics of queries that
  incorrectly rely on implementation-specific behavior. The old behavior can be
  restored via the `skip_redundant_sort` session property or the
  `optimizer.skip-redundant-sort` configuration property. ({issue}`18159`)
* Reduce default values for the `task.partitioned-writer-count` and
  `task.scale-writers.max-writer-count` configuration properties to reduce the
  memory requirements of queries that write data. ({issue}`18488`)

> * Reduce DNS lookup overhead on NodeScheduler. ({issue}`18365`)

Reviewer 2: What's the user-visible effect? NodeScheduler is an internal implementation detail.

Reviewer: From the PR it is maybe a small performance gain .. but not sure if we should call it that..

Reviewer: Seems like this is a performance and stability gain from the PR .. but I might be reading to much into the conversation in the PR @martint

> * Disallow coercing `timestamp` types to `varchar` for historical dates. ({issue}`18004`)

Reviewer 2: * What's a "historical date"? 
* There are no implicit casts between timestamp and varchar in the engine -- this change is specific to Hive, but in what context does it apply? E.g., for partition columns? When column metadata doesn't match data in files, etc?

Reviewer: Have to look at the PR some more to see if I can get that info.

Reviewer: Historical dates are before 1900 in this PR. Not sure about what context .. seems to be generic, at least from just looking at the PR.

Reviewer 2: Then we should call it out as "dates before xxx".

Reviewer: Done

* Remove the deprecated `optimizer.use-mark-distinct` configuration property,
  which has been replaced with `optimizer.mark-distinct-strategy`. ({issue}`18540`)
* Fix query planning failure due to dynamic filters in
  [fault tolerant execution mode](/admin/fault-tolerant-execution). ({issue}`18383`)

> * Fix URI extraction functions (`uri_extract_...`) ignoring input values that

Reviewer 2: This is a backward incompatible language change that needs more consideration before we can get it in. We're going to need to revert this for the release.

Reviewer: Removed

  are not a valid URI. Previously, the functions returned ``NULL`` in such
  cases. ({issue}`18253`)

> * Fix failure to calculate query statistics when a query contains

Reviewer 2: What is the visible impact of "failing to calculate statistics"? Does the query fail? Are the stats in presented to the connector incorrect?

Reviewer: Have to look some more at the PR.

Reviewer: This seems to be two fixes. In both cases running EXPLAIN on a query fails .. but not sure if the actual query would fail or what the effect is.

Reviewer 2: In that case, we should rephrase to "Fix EXPLAIN failure when ..."

Reviewer: Done

  `WHERE ... IN (NULL)`. ({issue}`18328`)

## JDBC driver

* Add support for
  [constrained delegation](https://web.mit.edu/kerberos/krb5-latest/doc/appdev/gssapi.html#constrained-delegation-s4u)
  with Kerberos. ({issue}`17853`)

> * Improve error messages from connection parameter validation. ({issue}`12587`)

Reviewer 2: We generally don't document improvements to error messages in the release notes.

Reviewer: In this case its pretty significant to from just a failure to actual error message that say what properties and values are wrong. This is part of the JDBC URL support for the CLI and that PR is already mentioned.

Author: The theory is that these changes are self-documenting, and users will gain the benefits of the change without needing to know anything or take any action.

## CLI

* Add support for accepting a single Trino JDBC URL with parameters as an
  alternative to passing command line arguments. ({issue}`12587`)

## Blackhole connector

* Add support for materialized views. ({issue}`18016`)
* Add support for the `COMMENT ON VIEW` statement. ({issue}`18516`)

## Delta Lake connector

* Add `$properties` system table which can be queried to inspect Delta Lake
  table properties. ({issue}`17294`)
* Add support for reading the `timestamp_ntz` type. ({issue}`17502`)
* Add support for writing the `timestamp with time zone` type on partitioned
  columns. ({issue}`16822`)
* Add option to enforce that a filter on a partition key is present for
  query processing. This can be enabled by setting the
  ``delta.query-partition-filter-required`` configuration property or the
  ``query_partition_filter_required`` session property to ``true``.
  ({issue}`18345`)

> * Improve performance of the $history system table. ({issue}`18427`)

Reviewer 2: `$history` (missing backquotes)

Reviewer: Done

* Allow metadata changes on Delta Lake tables with
  [identity columns](https://github.com/delta-io/delta/blob/master/PROTOCOL.md#identity-columns). ({issue}`18200`)
* Fix incorrectly creating files smaller than the configured
  `file_size_threshold` as part of `OPTIMIZE`. ({issue}`18388`)
* Fix query failure when a table has a file with a location ending with
  whitespace. ({issue}`18206`)

## Hive connector

> * Add support for `varchar` to `timestamp` coercion. ({issue}`18014`)

Reviewer 2: In what context? See comment above

* Remove the legacy Parquet writer, along with the
  `parquet.optimized-writer.enabled` configuration property and the
  `parquet_optimized_writer_enabled ` session property. Replace the
  `parquet.optimized-writer.validation-percentage` configuration property with
  `parquet.writer.validation-percentage`. ({issue}`18420`)
* Fix incorrectly creating files smaller than the configured
  `file_size_threshold` as part of `OPTIMIZE`. ({issue}`18388`)

> * Fix loss of data precision when coercing `timestamp` values. ({issue}`18003`)

Reviewer 2: Coercing to what? In what context?

* Fix query failure when a table has a file with a location ending with
  whitespace. ({issue}`18206`)
* Fix incorrect results when using S3 Select and a query predicate includes a
  quote character (`"`) or a decimal column. ({issue}`17775`)
* Add the `hive.s3select-pushdown.experimental-textfile-pushdown-enabled`
  configuration property to enable S3 Select pushdown for `TEXTFILE` tables. ({issue}`17775`)

## Hudi connector

* Fix incorrectly creating files smaller than the configured
  `file_size_threshold` as part of `OPTIMIZE`. ({issue}`18388`)
* Fix query failure when a table has a file with a location ending with
  whitespace. ({issue}`18206`)

## Iceberg connector

> * Add support for renaming nested fields in a column with a `RENAME COLUMN`

Reviewer 2: > ... via `RENAME COLUMN`

# Release 423 (2 Aug 2023)

## General

> * Add support for renaming fields with a `RENAME COLUMN` statement. ({issue}`16757`)

Reviewer: Why do we call it field vs column? 

```suggestion
* Add support for renaming columns with a `ALTER TABLE ... RENAME COLUMN` statement. ({issue}`16757`)
```

Reviewer 3: Because it renames fields. The syntax is `ALTER TABLE table RENAME COLUMN column.field TO new_field`

Reviewer: I might be missing something here.. what is a field of a column? 

In our SQL docs for rename column we have

```
ALTER TABLE [ IF EXISTS ] name RENAME COLUMN [ IF EXISTS ] old_name TO new_name
```

Is the field stuff something else?

Reviewer: oh .. I looked at #16959 now ... this new treatment for nested fields is completely undocumented at this stage so talking about it in the release notes is kinda bad. Anyway ... we need to catch up on this asap. 

@findepi @ebyhr @martint ... I think we need to do a few things:

1. Update ALTER TABLE and others around nested fields, what about CREATE TABLE ?
2. Maybe have some generic doc about nested fields to link to overall
3. Update docs for connectors that support that

Anything else you can think of? Is one of you going to work on this or can at least support me with relevant technical info and review?

Reviewer 3: In CREATE TABLE statement, we can simply use `column row(field int, ...)`. Currently, only Iceberg connector supports the syntax. 

I can support you. Please feel free to ask me if you have questions.

Reviewer: ok .. I will work on docs .. I also updated the release notes entry .. please have a look once I pushed

* Improve performance of `INSERT` and `CREATE TABLE AS ... SELECT` queries. ({issue}`18212`)
* Reduce default values for the `task.partitioned-writer-count` and
  `task.scale-writers.max-writer-count` configuration properties to reduce the
  memory requirements of queries that write data. ({issue}`18488`)
* Disallow coercing `timestamp` types to `varchar` for historical dates. ({issue}`18004`)
* Fix query planning failure due to dynamic filters in
  [fault tolerant execution mode](/admin/fault-tolerant-execution). ({issue}`18383`)
* Fix URI extraction functions (`uri_extract_...`) ignoring input which are not
  a valid URI. Previously, the functions returned ``NULL`` in such cases. ({issue}`18253`)
* Fix failure to calculate query statistics when a query contains
  `WHERE ... IN (NULL)`. ({issue}`18328`)

## JDBC driver

* Add support for
  [constrained delegation](https://web.mit.edu/kerberos/krb5-latest/doc/appdev/gssapi.html#constrained-delegation-s4u)
  with Kerberos. ({issue}`17853`)

> * Add support for taking action when there are connection parameter validation

Reviewer: What is meant here with "taking action" ?

Reviewer: @nineinchnick and @wendigo  .. can you clarify what this means?

Reviewer 4: It just means that exceptions are now more informative and actionable. instead of "invalid argument" you will get exception explaining the problem i.e. "argument a cannot be used when argument c is set"

Reviewer 4: It is user facing but not in a way thar is covered by docs

Reviewer 5: Also note that the release notes suggested in the PR were different:
> * Connection parameter validation errors are now actionable ({issue}`12587`)

Reviewer: I reworded now .. please have a look

* Add support for renaming nested fields in a column via `RENAME COLUMN`. ({issue}`16757`)
* Add support for setting the type of a nested field in a column via `SET DATA TYPE`. ({issue}`16959`)
* Add support for comments on materialized view columns. ({issue}`18016`)

> * Show original characters for string literals. ({issue}`5061`)

Author: I'm not really sure what this means.

Reviewer: Yeah .. not sure how to reword and also where it shows up .. the PR talk about displaying unicode symbols used for literals when doing a SHOW CREATE TABLE .. but I have no idea how wide the scope is .. for example I think it will also apply for SHOW CREATE SCHEMA or SHOW CREATE VIEW and so on..
